# Generation of ontologies with OntoGenix

## Elements to compare

| Dataset | Human generated ontology | LLM generated ontology |
| ------- | ----------------------- | --------------------- |
| [BigBasketProducts](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/chinmayshanbhag/big-basket-products) | [BigBasketProducts_ontology_human.owl](ontologies/BigBasketProducts_ontology_human.owl) | [BigBasketProducts_ontology_LLM.owl](ontologies/BigBasket_LLM.owl) |
| [Brazilian e-commerce](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/olistbr/brazilian-ecommerce) | [BrazilianEcommerce_ontology_human.owl](ontologies/BrazilianEcommerce_ontology_human.owl) | [BrazilianEcommerce_ontology_LLM.owl](ontologies/Brazillian_LLM.owl) |
| [eCommerce](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/carrie1/ecommerce-data) | [eCommerce_ontology_human.owl](ontologies/eCommerce_ontology_human.owl) | [eCommerce_ontology_LLM.owl](ontologies/Ecommerce_LLM.owl) |
| [Airline customer satisfaction](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/sjleshrac/airlines-customer-satisfaction) | [AirlinesCustomerSatisfaction_ontology_human.owl](ontologies/AirlinesCustomerSatisfaction_ontology_human.owl) | [AirlinesCustomerSatisfaction_ontology_LLM.owl](ontologies/Airlines_LLM.owl) |
| [Amazon rating](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/skillsmuggler/amazon-ratings) | [AmazonRatings_ontology_human.owl](ontologies/AmazonRatings_ontology_human.owl) | [AmazonRatings_ontology_LLM.owl](ontologies/Amazon_LLM.owl) |
| [Customer complaints](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/utkarshx27/consumer-complaint) | [CustomerComplaint_ontology_human.owl](ontologies/CustomerComplaint_ontology_human.owl) | [CustomerComplaints_ontology_LLM.owl](ontologies/CustomerComplaint_LLM.owl) |

## Results

### BigBasketProducts

* **Annotations:** The LLM ontology contains more annotations than the human one, including labels in multiple languages, descriptions and comments.

* **Classes:** The LLM ontology has more classes. The LLM includes many equivalentClass axioms, which do not seem correct in some cases. For example "Has offer" is proposed as a class and as an object property with the same URI. The axioms in the human-generated ontology make more sense.

* **Object Properties:** The LLM-generated ontology presents more object properties, but some should not be modelled as  object properties, such as category or subcategory, which should be classes and other properties could have been created. In terms of axiomatic complexity in object properties, both ontologies are similar, with better axioms for inverse object properties, domains and ranges in the human ontologies.

* **Data Properties:** The LLM proposes more datatype properties and creates subhierarchies. The LLM proposes equivalencies between datatype properties, which are sometimes wrong (discounted price and price specification). Both are able to reuse properties from external ontologies, like schema.org. 


 Both ontologies present a similar coverage of the CSV data, but the human-generated ontology presents oportunities for a more detailed modelling.

### BrazilianEcommerce

* **Annotations:** The LLM ontology contains more annotations than the human one, including labels in multiple languages, descriptions and comments.

* **Classes:** The human ontology has more classes. The LLM includes many equivalentClass axioms, which do not seem correct in some cases, for example customer is not equivalent to Person. The LLM misses classes such as seller.

* **Object Properties:** The human ontology present the more object properties, but the domain/range axioms of the LLM are more precise.

* **Data Properties:** The human ontology present more datatype properties, underrepresenting the content of the CSV.

### eCommerce

* **Annotations:**  The LLM ontology contains more annotations than the human one, including labels in multiple languages, descriptions and comments.

* **Classes:** The number of classes are similar. The LLM ontology tend to create equivalent classes to schema classes, but those are not always right (such as consumer and customer) ontologies have exactly the same classes. The human ontology includes more complex and complete axioms in the restricions. The LLM does not generate the individuals generated by the human.

* **Object Properties:** Both ontologies present similar object properties.

* **Data Properties:** The human generated ontology presents more data properties, related to the modelling presented in the classes hierarchy.

### AirlinesCustomerSatisfaction

* **Annotations:** The LLM ontology contains more annotations than the human one, including labels in multiple languages, descriptions and comments.

* **Classes:** The human-generated ontology models some of the entities as individuals rather than classes, and it includes more entities, with a finer modelling, in doing so.

* **Object Properties:** Both ontologies present the same object properties, with identical domain/range. The LLM includes disjointess axioms.

* **Data Properties:** Both ontologies present similar data properties, with identical domain/range.

### AmazonRatings

* **Annotations:** The LLM ontology contains more annotations than the human one, including labels in multiple languages, descriptions and comments.

* **Classes:** Both ontologies have the same number of relevant classes  and the same class names, indicating a similar high-level conceptualization of the domain. However, the LLM adds some other classes, named ErrorX, which are an artifact of the process.

* **Object Properties:** Both ontologies define the same object properties (hasProduct and hasCustomer), suggesting a similar approach to modeling relationships between entities.

* **Data Properties:** This is a significant difference between the two ontologies. The LLM-generated ontology includes data properties that are unnecessary and redundant, like ProductId. Additionally, the DataType ranges are correctly assigned by the human (xsd:string, xsd:double and xsd:int) but the LLM only assignes xsd:string ranges

### CustomerComplaints

* **Annotations:** The LLM ontology contains more annotations than the human one, including labels in multiple languages, descriptions and comments. In some cases, the LLM does not provide annotatins.

* **Classes:** Both ontologies present the same useful classes, but the human-generated ontology presents further subsumption relationships between them. The LLM generates additional classes for establishing equivalencies, without practical usefulness.

* **Object Properties:** Both ontologies present similar object properties, but the human-generated ontology presents more domain/range axioms.

* **Data Properties:** Both ontologies present similar data properties, but the human-generated ontology presents more domain/range axioms.

## Conclusions

In general terms, human generated ontologies include:

* Axioms of higher expressivity in class restrictions and properties.
* More accurate linking with entities of external ontologies (e.g. schema), being more interoperable.
* A more nuanced understanding of OWL modelling: instances vs classes, when to add a subsumption relationship, the need for N-ary relationships, etc.

Additionally, in some cases, LLM-generated ontologies include hallucinations:

* Entities modelled as both data and object properties.
* Inappropriate equivalent relations.

The LLM ontologies are richer in annotations.